[expo-router][docs] Add custom navigators guide (#46737)
expo/expo: docs/pages/router/advanced/custom-navigators.mdx

---

import { BookOpen02Icon } from '@expo/styleguide-icons/outline/BookOpen02Icon';

import { BoxLink } from '~/ui/components/BoxLink';
import { FileTree } from '~/ui/components/FileTree';

> **important** The custom navigator API described on this page is in [alpha](/more/release-statuses/#alpha) and available in SDK 56 and later. The API is subject to breaking changes.

Expo Router ships with navigators for the most common patterns — [Stack](/router/advanced/stack/), [Tabs](/router/advanced/tabs/), [Native tabs](/router/advanced/native-tabs/), and [Drawer](/router/advanced/drawer/). When none of them fit, you can build your own navigator and use it as a layout, with file-based routing, deep linking, and typed routes working exactly as they do for the built-in navigators.

Choose the entry point that matches your goal:

- **App developers** building a navigator for one app use [`unstable_createStandardRouterNavigator`](#create-a-navigator-in-your-app).
- **Library authors** shipping a reusable navigator for both Expo Router and React Navigation use [`unstable_integrateWithRouter`](#integrate-an-existing-navigator-library-authors).

## Create a navigator in your app

> Use `unstable_createStandardRouterNavigator` to turn a content component into a navigator you can render as a layout. It takes two arguments:

Reviewer: **[suggestion]** "It takes two arguments" contradicts the [Options](#options) section below, which documents an optional third argument on this same function (`style-guide.md#core-principles`).

```suggestion
Use `unstable_createStandardRouterNavigator` to turn a content component into a navigator you can render as a layout. It takes two required arguments:
```

- **`NavigatorContent`** — a component that renders your navigator's UI. It receives the current navigation `state`, the `descriptors` for each screen, `actions` to navigate, and an `emitter` to send events.

> - **`router`** — the routing behavior to use. Import `StackRouter` for stack-like navigation or `TabRouter` for tab-like navigation from `expo-router`.

Reviewer: **[nit]** Definition bullets in the docs join the bolded term to its description with a colon, and the punctuation rule reserves em dashes for rare phrase splits (`style-guide.md#punctuation`). Across **docs/pages**, the colon form appears in 425 bullets versus 8 with a dash.

```suggestion
- **`NavigatorContent`**: a component that renders your navigator's UI. It receives the current navigation `state`, the `descriptors` for each screen, `actions` to navigate, and an `emitter` to send events.
- **`router`**: the routing behavior to use. Import `StackRouter` for stack-like navigation or `TabRouter` for tab-like navigation from `expo-router`.
```

| `descriptors` | A map keyed by `route.key`. Each descriptor exposes the screen's resolved `options` and a `render()` function that renders the screen. |
| `actions`     | Functions to change the navigation state: `navigate(name, params?)` and `back()`.                                                      |
| `emitter`     | An object with an `emit()` method for sending events to screens.                                                                       |

### Typed events

If your navigator emits events, declare them in the second type argument to `NavigatorContentProps`. Each key is an event name, and its value describes the event's `data` and whether it `canPreventDefault`. `emitter.emit` is then typed against that map — unknown event names and mismatched payloads are rejected:

```tsx
type TabsContentProps = NavigatorContentProps<
  { title?: string },
  { tabPress: { data: undefined; canPreventDefault: true } }
>;

function TabsContent({ emitter }: TabsContentProps) {
  emitter.emit({ type: 'tabPress', canPreventDefault: true });
  // ...
}
```

> `unstable_createStandardRouterNavigator` infers the event map from the component, so you do not pass it again at the call site. Omit the second argument for a navigator that emits no events.

Reviewer: **[suggestion]** "Omit the second argument" can be misread as the factory's second argument (the `router`), since the preceding sentence is about the call site. The intended referent is the second type argument of `NavigatorContentProps` (`style-guide.md#core-principles`).

```suggestion
`unstable_createStandardRouterNavigator` infers the event map from the component, so you do not pass it again at the call site. Omit the second type argument for a navigator that emits no events.
```

### Options

Both `unstable_createStandardRouterNavigator` and `unstable_integrateWithRouter` accept an optional `options` object as their third argument:

- **`useOnlyUserDefinedScreens`** — when `true`, only screens you declare with `<Navigator.Screen>` are rendered. Expo Router ignores routes discovered from the filesystem that you did not declare. Defaults to `false`, where Expo Router also renders routes discovered from the filesystem alongside your declared screens.

> - **`createProps`** — derives extra props for `NavigatorContent` from the underlying router state. Use this for router-specific information that is not part of the standard `state` and `actions`.

Reviewer: **[nit]** Same colon convention as the bullets on lines 24-25 (`style-guide.md#punctuation`). Separately and optionally: the first clause could be active, as in "when `true`, Expo Router renders only the screens you declare with `<Navigator.Screen>`".

```suggestion
- **`useOnlyUserDefinedScreens`**: when `true`, only screens you declare with `<Navigator.Screen>` are rendered. Expo Router ignores routes discovered from the filesystem that you did not declare. Defaults to `false`, where Expo Router also renders routes discovered from the filesystem alongside your declared screens.
- **`createProps`**: derives extra props for `NavigatorContent` from the underlying router state. Use this for router-specific information that is not part of the standard `state` and `actions`.
```

```tsx
export const Tabs = createStandardRouterNavigator(TabsContent, TabRouter, {
  useOnlyUserDefinedScreens: true,

>   createProps: ({ state, dispatch }) => ({

Reviewer: **[suggestion]** This snippet shows how to supply `activeRouteKey` and `preload`, but the page never shows how `NavigatorContent` declares these props (`style-guide.md#core-principles`). `NavigatorContentProps` accepts a third type argument for exactly this, and this PR's own mirror test in **integration.test.ios.tsx** declares `CreatePropsProps` there (as optional props, since the `<Tabs>` element does not pass them). Consider a sentence after the snippet, or an extended snippet, showing the third type argument so readers can consume the injected props in a typed way.

    activeRouteKey: state.routes[state.index].key,
    preload: (name: string) => dispatch({ type: 'PRELOAD', payload: { name } }),
  }),
});
```

> > **info** `createProps` receives the raw Expo Router `state` and `dispatch`. These are internal and may have breaking changes between releases, so prefer the `state` and `actions` passed to `NavigatorContent` when they are enough. If something you need to build your navigator is missing from the standard `state`, `actions`, or `emitter`, [let us know in an issue](https://github.com/expo/expo/issues).

Reviewer: **[suggestion]** First-person plural in a non-tutorial page (`style-guide.md#anti-patterns`). Naming the destination also makes the link text more descriptive.

```suggestion
> **info** `createProps` receives the raw Expo Router `state` and `dispatch`. These are internal and may have breaking changes between releases, so prefer the `state` and `actions` passed to `NavigatorContent` when they are enough. If something you need to build your navigator is missing from the standard `state`, `actions`, or `emitter`, [open an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/expo/expo/issues).
```

<FileTree
  files={[
    ['./src/TabsContent.tsx', 'Navigator UI implementing the standard navigator API'],
    ['./src/index.ts', 'Root entry — exports the framework-agnostic navigator'],
    ['./src/react-navigation.ts', 'React Navigation entry — integrates the same navigator'],
    ['./src/expo-router.ts', 'Expo Router entry — unstable_integrateWithRouter(navigator, ...)'],
    ['./package.json', 'Maps subpath exports to each framework entry'],
  ]}
/>

Map each entry point to a [subpath export](https://nodejs.org/api/packages.html#subpath-exports) in your library's **package.json**, pointing at your build output:

```json package.json
{
  "exports": {
    ".": {
      "types": "./lib/typescript/index.d.ts",
      "default": "./lib/module/index.js"
    },
    "./react-navigation": {
      "types": "./lib/typescript/react-navigation.d.ts",
      "default": "./lib/module/react-navigation.js"
    },
    "./expo-router": {
      "types": "./lib/typescript/expo-router.d.ts",
      "default": "./lib/module/expo-router.js"
    }
  }
}
```

> Consumers then import the integration for their framework — for example `import { Tabs } from 'my-tabs/expo-router'` — while you maintain the navigator logic in one place.

Reviewer: **[suggestion]** Paired em dashes split the sentence around the example; parentheses keep the aside without the phrase-split punctuation the rule asks to avoid (`style-guide.md#punctuation`).

```suggestion
Consumers then import the integration for their framework (for example, `import { Tabs } from 'my-tabs/expo-router'`) while you maintain the navigator logic in one place.
```
